Where Query documentation improvements (#15599)
apache/grails-core: grails-data-hibernate5/docs/src/docs/asciidoc/querying/whereQueries.adoc

> def callable = {
>     lastName == "Simpson"
> }
> 
> def query = Person.where(callable)

Reviewer: **Lost "won't work" signal.** This block demonstrates code that *fails* (the surrounding prose says "the following will produce an error"), but the code itself reads as a normal example. A copy/paster may not notice. Suggest annotating:

```suggestion
def callable = {
    lastName == "Simpson"
}

// Fails: where() requires an inline closure for the AST transform
def query = Person.where(callable)
```

*<=*,sizeLe,The collection size is less than or equal to
|===

==== Sorting

Sorting with `where` queries is performed by passing `sort` and (optionally) `order` arguments to the `list` method of a <<detachedCriteria,Detached Criteria>>.

===== Single-field Sorting

To sort by a single property:

[source,groovy]
----
def query = Person.where {
    firstName == "Jack"
}

def results = query.list(sort: "firstName")
----

> By default, sorting is ascending. You can specify the direction explicitly using the `order` argument:

Reviewer 2: The reason the alias name is being mentioned here is because you can technically call createAlias on these - and if you do with an overlap, it will fail to create.

Author: Understood but is that a real use case? It looks loike a disclosure of an inner working we dont need to know when quering. Or we need to explain it better like having a dedicated chapter?

Reviewer 2: It's not always clear but you can call methods from the criteria builder or use the dsl syntax.  DetachedCriterias are composable while Criterias use closure composition to be combined.  If you want static typing, the DetachedCriteria solution is thus a better solution.  So the use case is a conversion path or you want to influence the generated query.  Since those methods are callable, you can technically reference them using the alias.  I don't mind moving this to a note or something that's called out separately, but we should leave this in the documentation until createAlias is removed (i think that's in hibernate 7)

Reviewer 3: createAlias is supported in HibernateCriteriaBuilder in grails-datamapping-hibernate7
```java
  void "trySimpleCriteria: createAlias delegates to builder.createAlias"() {
        when:
        invoker.trySimpleCriteria('createAlias', CriteriaMethods.CREATE_ALIAS, ['transactions', 't'] as Object[])
        invoker.trySimpleCriteria('createAlias', CriteriaMethods.CREATE_ALIAS, ['transactions', 't', 0] as Object[])

        then:
        1 * builder.createAlias('transactions', 't')
        1 * builder.createAlias('transactions', 't', 0)
    }
------------
case CREATE_ALIAS:
                    if (args.length == 2 && args[0] instanceof String s && args[1] instanceof String a) {
                        return builder.createAlias(s, a);
                    } else if (args.length == 3 &&
                            args[0] instanceof String s &&
                            args[1] instanceof String a &&
                            args[2] instanceof Number jt) {
                        builder.createAlias(s, a, jt.intValue());
                        return builder;
                    }
                    return name;
------------------                    
public org.grails.datastore.mapping.query.api.Criteria createAlias(
            String associationPath, String alias, int joinType) {
        var prop = hibernateQuery.getEntity().getPropertyByName(associationPath);
        JoinType convertedJoinType = convertFromInt(joinType);
        if (prop instanceof org.grails.datastore.mapping.model.types.Basic) {
            hibernateQuery.addAlias(
                    new org.grails.orm.hibernate.query.HibernateAlias(associationPath, alias, convertedJoinType));
            return this;
        }
        hibernateQuery.getDetachedCriteria().createAlias(associationPath, alias);
        hibernateQuery.getDetachedCriteria().join(associationPath, convertedJoinType);
        return this;
    }
```

*<=*,sizeLe,The collection size is less than or equal to
|===

==== Sorting

Sorting with `where` queries is performed by passing `sort` and (optionally) `order` arguments to the `list` method of a <<detachedCriteria,Detached Criteria>>.

===== Single-field Sorting

To sort by a single property:

[source,groovy]
----
def query = Person.where {
    firstName == "Jack"
}

def results = query.list(sort: "firstName")
----

By default, sorting is ascending. You can specify the direction explicitly using the `order` argument:

[source,groovy]
----
def results = query.list(sort: "firstName", order: "desc")
----

===== Multi-field Sorting

To sort by multiple fields, pass a `Map` to the `sort` argument:

[source,groovy]
----

> def results = query.list(sort: [
>     firstName: "asc",
>     birthDate: "desc"
> ])

Reviewer: **`birthDate` is introduced without context.** Throughout this file the running `Person` example has only `firstName`, `lastName`, and `age`. `birthDate` doesn't appear anywhere else. Suggest using a property already established (e.g. `lastName`) so the example is self-contained:

```suggestion
def results = query.list(sort: [
    firstName: "asc",
    lastName: "desc"
])
```

Also confirms that the Map-sort feature exists in `DynamicFinder.applySortForMap()` (`DynamicFinder.java:550`) but had not been documented before this PR - good catch including it.

----

This sorts results first by `firstName` ascending and then by `birthDate` descending.

===== Sorting with Associations

When sorting by properties of associated entities, you must define an explicit alias within the `where` query:

[source,groovy]
----
def query = Pet.where {
    def o = owner
    o.firstName == "Fred"
}

def results = query.list(sort: "o.lastName")
----

Without an explicit alias, sorting on association properties may fail due to dynamically generated aliases.

> In the example above, GORM will generate an alias for the `owner` association such as `owner_alias_0`. These generated aliases are fine for most cases, but are not useful if you want to later sort or use a projection on the results. For example the following query will fail:

Reviewer: **Logical-flow regression: backward reference to an example that doesn't match.** The new ordering reads:

1. Show explicit-alias example (`def o = owner`) - this is the *working* case
2. Sentence: "Without an explicit alias, sorting on association properties may fail..."
3. Sentence: "**In the example above**, GORM will generate an alias for the `owner` association such as `owner_alias_0`..."
4. Failing dynamic-alias example

The phrase "In the example above" points back to the explicit-alias example, but the explanation describes the *generated*-alias case shown below it. The original ordering (problem -> cause -> fix) avoided this. Two options:

- Restore the original order (failing example first, then explanation, then explicit-alias fix), or
- Reword line 329 to "When you do not declare an explicit alias, GORM will generate an alias..." and move the failing example immediately after that sentence.

Also: the original section used `<1> <2> <3>` callouts on the explicit-alias example ("<1> Define alias / <2> Use alias in query / <3> Use alias for sort"). Those were pedagogically useful; consider restoring them on lines 319-324.
